[`ruff`] Add rule to replace `noqa` comments with `ruff:ignore` (`RUF105`) (#26423)
astral-sh/ruff: crates/ruff_linter/resources/mdtest/ruff/noqa-comment.md

# ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 for some reason
import math
import os
from module import *
for os in []:
    pass
```

```snapshot
error[RUF105]: `ruff: noqa` comment used instead of `ruff:file-ignore`
 --> src/mdtest_snippet.py:2:1
  |
2 | # ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 for some reason
  | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |
help: Use `ruff:file-ignore` instead
  |
1 | # snapshot: noqa-comment
  - # ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 for some reason
2 + # ruff:file-ignore[F401, F402, F403] for some reason
3 | import math
  |
```

### Multiple codes followed by a nested (pragma) comment

```py
# snapshot: noqa-comment
# ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 # fmt:skip
import math
import os
from module import *
for os in []:
    pass
```

```snapshot
error[RUF105]: `ruff: noqa` comment used instead of `ruff:file-ignore`
 --> src/mdtest_snippet.py:2:1
  |
2 | # ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 # fmt:skip
  | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |
help: Use `ruff:file-ignore` instead
  |
1 | # snapshot: noqa-comment
  - # ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 # fmt:skip
2 + # ruff:file-ignore[F401, F402, F403] # fmt:skip
3 | import math
  |
```

### A single invalid code disables the rule

```py

> # ruff: noqa: UNK001

Reviewer: What about if there are multiple codes, and only one of them is unknown? I also believe that codes configured with `external` aren't considered unknown? Can you add a test showing how the new rule interacts with `external`?

I think I'd sort of expect this rule to fire when I use a noqa, regardless of whether the code is known or not. It prevents situations where you fix the code, only to then see a warning about having to use `ruff:ignore`. Or does Ruff tread every invalid code as unused? I'm asking because I'm sort of fine to disable the rule if the comment is unused. But we may handle unknown codes differently

Author: A single unknown or inactive code disables the rule, even if other known and active codes are present. Codes configured with `external` are still considered unknown. That's why this rule uses its own `is_valid_code` helper that excludes `external` instead of reusing `invalid_rule_code::code_is_valid`.

My thinking was that if you're using a code that we don't recognize, configured or not, the comment must be intended for a different tool and suggesting that you use `ruff:ignore` doesn't make sense. 

I guess I see what you mean, though. You could get an `invalid-rule-code` diagnostic, fix a typo, and only then get an error about the noqa comment. I could try disabling the rule only for known `external` codes rather than fully unknown codes.

> Or does Ruff tread every invalid code as unused?

We appear to treat fully unknown codes as used for the purposes for [`unused-noqa`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unused-noqa/#see-also): https://play.ruff.rs/4c2487e0-8c0b-4837-80aa-739e035c7bd4. Possibly that's where I got the idea, but I can't remember for sure.

  | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |
help: Use `ruff:file-ignore` instead
  |
1 | # snapshot: noqa-comment
  - # ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 for some reason
2 + # ruff:file-ignore[F401, F402, F403] for some reason
3 | import math
  |
```

### Multiple codes followed by a nested (pragma) comment

```py
# snapshot: noqa-comment
# ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 # fmt:skip
import math
import os
from module import *
for os in []:
    pass
```

```snapshot
error[RUF105]: `ruff: noqa` comment used instead of `ruff:file-ignore`
 --> src/mdtest_snippet.py:2:1
  |
2 | # ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 # fmt:skip
  | ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |
help: Use `ruff:file-ignore` instead
  |
1 | # snapshot: noqa-comment
  - # ruff: noqa: F401, F402, F403 # fmt:skip
2 + # ruff:file-ignore[F401, F402, F403] # fmt:skip
3 | import math
  |
```

### Unknown codes do not disable the rule

In case the unknown code is a typo rather than an intentionally external code, we emit both
`invalid-rule-code` and `noqa-comment`:

```toml
[lint]
preview = true
select = ["noqa-comment", "unused-noqa", "invalid-rule-code", "F401"]
```

```py
# error: [noqa-comment]
# snapshot: invalid-rule-code

> import math  # noqa: F401, UNK001

Reviewer: Should the snapshot be the other way round? That is, should we snapshot `noqa-comment` here?

```

```snapshot
error[RUF102]: Invalid rule code in `# noqa`: UNK001
 --> src/mdtest_snippet.py:3:28
  |
3 | import math  # noqa: F401, UNK001
  |                            ^^^^^^
  |
help: Add non-Ruff rule codes to the `lint.external` configuration option
help: Remove the rule code `UNK001`
  |
2 | # snapshot: invalid-rule-code
  - import math  # noqa: F401, UNK001
3 + import math  # noqa: F401
  |
```

> ### External codes disable the rule

Reviewer: I find the word *disable the rule* a bit misleading. It's not that we disable the rule. It's more that using noqa remains allowed in combination with external codes.

> However, if the code is intentionally marked as `external`, we *do* disable the rule:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if the code is intentionally marked as `external`, we *do* allow using `noqa`:
```

```py
# ruff: noqa: F401, F402
import math
```

### Flake8 comments are ignored

```py
# flake8: noqa: F401
import math
```

## Inline comments

### Basic

```py
# snapshot: noqa-comment
import math  # noqa: F401

import os  # noqa: F401, F402
```

```snapshot
error[RUF105]: `noqa` comment used instead of `ruff:ignore`
 --> src/mdtest_snippet.py:2:14
  |
2 | import math  # noqa: F401
  |              ^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |
help: Use `ruff:ignore` instead
  |
1 | # snapshot: noqa-comment
  - import math  # noqa: F401
2 + import math  # ruff:ignore[F401]
3 |
  |
```

### Nested pragma comment before the directive

```py
# snapshot: noqa-comment
import math  # fmt:skip # noqa: F401
```

```snapshot
error[RUF105]: `noqa` comment used instead of `ruff:ignore`
 --> src/mdtest_snippet.py:2:25
  |
2 | import math  # fmt:skip # noqa: F401
  |                         ^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |
help: Use `ruff:ignore` instead
  |
1 | # snapshot: noqa-comment
  - import math  # fmt:skip # noqa: F401
2 + import math  # fmt:skip # ruff:ignore[F401]
  |
```

## Blanket comments

RUF105 flags blanket comments but does not offer a fix because `ruff:ignore` requires at least one

> rule selector.

Reviewer: and I think the complexity is that we don't track which rules were suppressed by a noqa comment?

Author: It turns out that we actually do track this in `matches`:

https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/blob/c36f66207d6968dbbe1769bd50f80a4c02d17b57/crates/ruff_linter/src/noqa.rs#L1150-L1156

I wonder why we don't use this in PGH004.

Author: Happy to revert this if I went too far, but I got this working with `matches` without too much code. My only hesitation is whether this logic belongs exclusively in PGH004 or if it's okay to use it here too.
